kursplaner/en/4DV003_FormalMethods.md, before:

# 4DV003 - Formal methods (5 HEC)

|     |     |
| --- | --- | 
| *Main field of study*: | Computer Science | 
| *Progression*: | A1N | 

## Prerequisites

- 1DV003 - Databaser och datamodellering
- 1DV005 - Jämnlöpande program 
- 1DV006 - Algoritmer
- 2DV006 - Datorsäkerhet
- 1MA001 - Diskret matematik
- 4DV001 - Modellering och simulering av system

## Learnings outcomes

After completing the course the student shall be able to:

- reason abstractly about safety and security aspects of systems
- specify safety and security properties of systems at modelling and programming level using different logics
- apply various techniques and tools for checking and enforcing safety and security properties
- use runtime monitoring to enforce security policies

*1. Knowledge and understanding*
	1. Reason about what safety and security means for a software program or system, and which properties are required, 
	2. describe methods and challenges to formally verify safety and security properties of software systems and what limitations these methods have, 
	3. describe the stateof the art of formal methods and verification, and
	4. describe how runtime-monitoring can be used to enforce security and safety requirements.
*2.	Skills and abilities*
	1. Define safety properties in concurrent systems and programs using different types of logic, 
	2. use different methods to verify the correctness, safety, and security of modelled and implemented systems, and
	3. use the most common tools to describe and verify software systems and programs.
*3.	Judgement and approach*
	1. Reason about the societal impact (including socio-economical costs) caused by faulty and in-secure software can cause and how formal methods can be used to reduce this impact.

## Course contents

The course gives an introduction to formal verification and introduces, e.g., temporal logic.

The following items are covered:

- Introduction to formal verification.
- Classification of different verification techniques.
- Process algebra (CCS), and how it can be extended with time delays.
- Timed automata
- Propositional and predicate logic, and temporal logic (LTL, CTL)
- Programming languages semantics
- Program verification using Hoare logic and separation logic 
- LTL and CTL model checking
- Runtime monitoring

## Types of instruction

The instruction consists of lectures, seminars, and teacher-supervised laboratory sessions. The course also contains a series of guest lectures where representatives from industry and research discusses how and why they use formal verification in their work, including which methods and tools.

## Examination

The examination of the course is divided as follows:

| Code | Name             | Grade | HEC | 
| :--- | :------------------------------------------ | :---: | :---: |  
|`UPG1`| Formal verification of a software program | A-F   | 1     |  
|`UPG2`| Formal verification of a systems model     | A-F   | 1     |  
|`TEN1`| Written exam                         | A-F   | 3     | 


## Methods of Evaluation

The learning outcomes are evaluated as follows:

| Outcome |`UPG1` |`UPG2` |`TEN1` |
| :--------- | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| 1.1        | **X** | **X** | **X** |
| 1.2        |       |       | **X** |
| 1.3        | **X** | **X** | **X** |
| 1.4        |       |       | **X** |
| 2.1        | **X** | **X** | **X** |
| 2.2        | **X** | **X** |       |
| 2.3        | **X** | **X** |       |
| 3.1        |       |       | **X** |

## Reading list

Required reading:

- Aceto, L., Ingólfsdóttir, A., Guldstrand Larsen, K. och Srba, J., *Reactive Systems: Modelling, Specification and Verification*, Cambridge University Press, 2014.  Antal sidor: 150 av 281.
- Huth, M. och Ryan, M., *Logic in Computer Science: Modelling and Reasoning about Systems*, andra utgåvan, Cambridge University Press, 2004. Antal sidor: 300 av 412.
- Compendium of scientific articles.

## Other information

The course is conducted in such a way that the course participants' experiences and knowledge are made visible and developed. This means, for example, that we have an inclusive approach and strive for no one to feel excluded. This can be expressed in different ways in a course, for example by using the gender neutral example.

Commit message:

Fixade sista översättningen och småfixar i andra (och, av, osv). Mindre layoutfixar i några av de svenska

kursplaner/en/4DV003_FormalMethods.md, after:

# 4DV003 - Formal methods (5 HEC)

|     |     |
| --- | --- | 
| *Main field of study*: | Computer Science | 
| *Progression*: | A1N | 

## Prerequisites

- 1DV003 - Databaser och datamodellering
- 1DV005 - Jämnlöpande program 
- 1DV006 - Algoritmer
- 2DV006 - Datorsäkerhet
- 1MA001 - Diskret matematik
- 4DV001 - Modellering och simulering av system

## Learnings outcomes

After completing the course the student shall be able to:

- reason abstractly about safety and security aspects of systems
- specify safety and security properties of systems at modelling and programming level using different logics
- apply various techniques and tools for checking and enforcing safety and security properties
- use runtime monitoring to enforce security policies

*1. Knowledge and understanding*
	1. Reason about what safety and security means for a software program or system, and which properties are required, 
	2. describe methods and challenges to formally verify safety and security properties of software systems and what limitations these methods have, 
	3. describe the stateof the art of formal methods and verification, and
	4. describe how runtime-monitoring can be used to enforce security and safety requirements.
*2.	Skills and abilities*
	1. Define safety properties in concurrent systems and programs using different types of logic, 
	2. use different methods to verify the correctness, safety, and security of modelled and implemented systems, and
	3. use the most common tools to describe and verify software systems and programs.
*3.	Judgement and approach*
	1. Reason about the societal impact (including socio-economical costs) caused by faulty and in-secure software can cause and how formal methods can be used to reduce this impact.

## Course contents

The course gives an introduction to formal verification and introduces, e.g., temporal logic.

The following items are covered:

- Introduction to formal verification.
- Classification of different verification techniques.
- Process algebra (CCS), and how it can be extended with time delays.
- Timed automata
- Propositional and predicate logic, and temporal logic (LTL, CTL)
- Programming languages semantics
- Program verification using Hoare logic and separation logic 
- LTL and CTL model checking
- Runtime monitoring

## Types of instruction

The instruction consists of lectures, seminars, and teacher-supervised laboratory sessions. The course also contains a series of guest lectures where representatives from industry and research discusses how and why they use formal verification in their work, including which methods and tools.

## Examination

The examination of the course is divided as follows:

| Code | Name             | Grade | HEC | 
| :--- | :------------------------------------------ | :---: | :---: |  
|`UPG1`| Formal verification of a software program | A-F   | 1     |  
|`UPG2`| Formal verification of a systems model     | A-F   | 1     |  
|`TEN1`| Written exam                         | A-F   | 3     | 


## Methods of Evaluation

The learning outcomes are evaluated as follows:

| Outcome |`UPG1` |`UPG2` |`TEN1` |
| :--------- | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| 1.1        | **X** | **X** | **X** |
| 1.2        |       |       | **X** |
| 1.3        | **X** | **X** | **X** |
| 1.4        |       |       | **X** |
| 2.1        | **X** | **X** | **X** |
| 2.2        | **X** | **X** |       |
| 2.3        | **X** | **X** |       |
| 3.1        |       |       | **X** |

## Reading list

Required reading:

- Aceto, L., Ingólfsdóttir, A., Guldstrand Larsen, K., and Srba, J., *Reactive Systems: Modelling, Specification and Verification*, Cambridge University Press, 2014. Pages: 150 of 281.
- Huth, M. and Ryan, M., *Logic in Computer Science: Modelling and Reasoning about Systems*, second edition, Cambridge University Press, 2004. Pages: 300 of 412.
- Compendium of scientific articles.

## Other information

The course is conducted in such a way that the course participants' experiences and knowledge are made visible and developed. This means, for example, that we have an inclusive approach and strive for no one to feel excluded. This can be expressed in different ways in a course, for example by using the gender neutral example.
