---
Name:       MDE project
PrelCode:   4DV003
HEC:        10
Year:       4
Period:     1-2
Examiner1:  ??    
Examiner2:  ??
Status:     FirstDraft
Mandatory:  Yes
Subject:    ComputerScience
Type:       Project
PreReq:     1DV003;1DV005;1DV010;1DV011  
title:      4DV003 - MDE project (10 hec)
---

# 4DV003 - MDE project (10 hec)

## Prerequisites

Object-oriented Programming in Java, UML, Software Engineering, Discrete mathematics, Software Architecture.

## Learnings outcomes

After completing the course the student is expected to:

*1. Knowledge and understanding*

1. Identify the complexities of software design and development in the domain of Model-Driven Engineering
2.  Classify and explain the principles and concepts underlying model-driven software engineering: models, metamodel, constraints, transformation, semantics, abstract and concrete syntax
3. Explain the architecture of contemporary modeling frameworks
4. Explain how domain specific modeling languages can be realized within a contemporary modeling framework 
5. Explain the basic concepts and techniques underlying automated software design and verification

*2. Skills and abilities*

1. Apply modelling in practice from requirements gathering to running software
2. Apply frameworks for model-driven software engineering, including the definition of meta-models for domain-specific modelling languages and the definition of UML profiles
3. Construct model editors within a modeling framework tool
4. Create model validators within a modeling framework
5. Specify model transformations, and realize them within a modeling framework

*3. Judgement and approach*

1. Reflect on the choice of Model-Driven Engineering methods used in the project

## Course contents

Models are primary artefacts in all engineering activities, and are used to analyze how things behave within specific areas of interest — e.g., mechanics, physics, and computing. Model-driven Engineering (MDE) is an emerging software engineering discipline which exploit models at all stages of the development process, from design to validation. Indeed, models are primary artefacts of the software development process while programs are mainly generated by means of automated model-to-code transformations. MDE is applicable across a wide range of domains such as cloud- and web-based services, networked embedded systems, mobile applications. This course introduces the core principles and concepts underlying MDE, and provides students with the state-of-the-art working knowledge, including:

- Foundation of Software Engineering and Modeling
- Model-Based Development, Model-Driven Engineering, Model-Driven Architecture
- UML, Modeling languages, Metamodeling, Profiling, Action languages, Domain-Specific Languages. Tool support for metamodeling. 
- Model transformations, model constraints. Tool support and standard QVT language for model transformations
- Model based testing
- Model validation
- Automated code generation

## Modules

- Modelling and model-transformation assignments (MA), 3 credits
- Module 2: Project Development (PD), 5 credits
- Final: Home Exam (HE), 2 credits


## Types of instruction

The types of instruction for this course comprises traditional lectures for teaching the theoretical contents, practical sessions for tutoring modelling assignments, and supervision meetings for guiding and advising on the project development

## Examination

The learning outcomes of this course are assessed with the help of 2 modeling assignments to evaluate knowledge and understanding on modeling and model transformations taught during the theoretical lectures, a project to evaluate skills, and a home exam to evaluate understanding and judgement. 

## Grading

The course is assessed with an A-F grading. If one of the modules is failed, then final course grade is F. 

To pass a module, the student needs at least 50% of the points, otherwise the course is failed. The grading table is provided in the following:

|Final Grade (A-F) | Grading Points (%) |
| ---------------  | ------------------ |
| A                | >= 90              |
| B                | >= 80              |
| C                | >= 70              |
| D                | >= 60              |
| E                | >= 50              |

Each modeling assignment will be graded with points. To pass the modeling assignments module, the average of points of the two assignments shall be at least 50%.

If all the three modules are passed, then the course is passed and the final course grade is an A-F grade based on a weighted average of 30% for the Modeling Assignments, 50% for the Project Development and 20% for the Home Exam. 

In order to relate the learning outcomes to the assessments, we provide the following table:



|     | MA1 | MA2 | PD  | HE  | 
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1.1 |  X  |     |     |  X  |
| 1.2 |  X  |     |     |  X  |
| 1.3 |  X  |     |     |     |
| 1.4 |     |  X  |     |     |
| 1.5 |     |  X  |     |     |
| 2.1 |     |     |  X  |     |
| 2.2 |     |     |  X  |     |
| 2.3 |     |     |  X  |     |
| 2.4 |     |     |  X  |     |  
| 2.5 |     |     |  X  |     |
| 3.1 |     |     |     |  X  |



## Literature

- M. Brambilla, J. Cabot, and M. Wimmer. Model-Driven Software Engineering in Practice (2nd ed.). Morgan & Claypool Publishers. 2017.
-  D. Steinberg, F. Budinsky, M. Paternostro, E. Merks. EMF: Eclipse Modeling Framework, 2nd Edition. Addison-Wesley Professional. 2008.
-  S. Kelly, J-P. Tolvanen. Domain-Specific Modeling. Wiley-IEEE Computer Society Press. 2008.
-  S. J. Mellor, M. J. Balcer. Executable UML: A Foundation for Model-Driven Architecture, Addison-Wesley Professional. 2002.
-  J. Royer and H. Arboleda. Model-Driven and Software Product Line Engineering. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 2013. Chapters 3 and 6. 